---
title: Keyboard Input
authors: Gary Lupton, Jon Stapleton
description: Learn how to write programs which react to users' key presses!
video: https://youtube.com/embed/Mu8VDPhdPdw
type: tutorial
---
Using keys on the keyboard is a common way for users to provide input for a program to use during run-time. Player movement might occur with the arrow keys or WASD. The space bar might make a character "jump". "Enter" might fire a projectile. The number keys might access different items. Keyboard commands are ubiquitous in PC games.

> **Note:** This tutorial will cover some basic functionality of keyboard commands in Java Processing. As a reminder, the possibilities for [keyboard input in Java Processing](https://processing.org/reference#input-keyboard) is much broader than what is provided here. This should be a start for the journey, not the final destination!

## Identifying Keys

The first step in working with keyboard commands is to use the` keyPressed()` method. The computer executes the code written within this method whenever it detects that the user has pressed a key on the keyboard. Check out this example, which causes the computer to display different background colors based on which keys the user presses:

:::code-and-image{src="/images/TODO:"}
```java
color bgColor;  
  
void setup(){  
  size(800, 600);  
  bgColor = #000000;  
}  
  
void draw(){  
  background(bgColor);  
}  
  
void keyPressed(){  
  if(keyCode == ' ' || keyCode == 'S' || keyCode == ENTER){  
    if(bgColor == #000000){  
      bgColor = #ffffff;  
    } else {  
      bgColor = #000000;  
    }  
  }  
}
```
:::

> **Note:** Note that the `draw()` method needs to be included in the code anytime the `keyPressed()` method is used, even if there is no code in the `draw()` method.

To have the computer make a decision about what to do when the user presses a key, you'll need to use an "if" statement in conjunction with the `keyCode` variable. The `keyCode` variable is generated by Java Processing, and stores the last key the user pressed. In the example above, the "if" statement directs the computer to compare the value stored in the `keyCode` variable with a known code, such as a space(`' '`), a letter (`'S'`) or a specialty key (`ENTER`).

## The `key` Variable

Another variable created by Java Processing to deal with keyboard input is `key`.  The difference between the `key` variable and the `keyCode` variable is that `key` holds the character entered by the user. The `keyCode` variable holds a numeric value that represents the [ASCII value](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/ascii-table/) of the key pressed. Here's an example that uses `key`:

:::code-and-image{src="/images/TODO:"}
```java
String msg;  
  
void setup(){  
  size(800, 600);  
  msg = "";  
}  
  
void draw(){  
  background(#ffffff);  
  textSize(30);  
  fill(#000000);  
  text(msg, 10, 100, 790, 500);  
}  
  
void keyPressed(){  
  if(key != CODED && key != DELETE && key != BACKSPACE && key != TAB && key != ENTER && key != RETURN && key != ESC){  
    msg += key;  
  }  
}
```
:::

In Code Segment 055 - Keys and Codes, the key variable is used. The "if" statement makes sure that the computer ignores certain keys so the program doesn't end up trying to use non-letter keys in the `msg` displayed on screen.
  
> **Practice:** Try changing the line that reads `msg += key` to `msg += keyCode` and see what happens when you run the program and type.

## Object Control

One of the most foundational uses of the keyboard with games is controlling an object on the screen. The example below demonstrates how you can have the computer move shapes using the two most common methods: WASD and arrow keys.

:::code-and-image{src="/images/TODO:"}
```java
int xPos, yPos, speed;  
  
void setup(){  
  size(800, 600);  
  xPos = width/2;  
  yPos = height/2;  
  speed = 5;  
}  
  
void draw(){  
  background(#ffffff);  
  fill(#00ffff);  
  circle(xPos, yPos, 100);  
}  
  
void keyPressed(){  
  if(keyCode == UP || keyCode == 'W'){  
    yPos -= speed;  
  } else if(keyCode == DOWN || keyCode == 'S'){  
    yPos += speed;  
  } else if(keyCode == LEFT || keyCode == 'A'){  
    xPos -= speed;  
  } else if(keyCode == RIGHT || keyCode == 'D'){  
    xPos += speed;  
  }  
}
```
:::

## Practice Questions

Use these practice questions to assess your skills! If you have trouble getting them right, try reviewing some of the material above.

:::practice-question{name="Predicting Keyboard Input"}
Given the following code segment, what happens on the screen when the user hits the left arrow key?

```java
void keyPressed(){
   color col;  
   
   if(keyCode == LEFT || keyCode == RIGHT){
      col = #ff0000;
   } else if(keyCode == UP || keyCode == DOWN){
      col = #00ff00;
   }

   fill(col);  
   circle(width/2, height/2, 100);  
}
```

- [ ] A green circle is drawn in the middle of the screen
- [x] A red circle is drawn in the middle of the screen
- [ ] A red circle moves to the left
- [ ] A green circle moves to the left
:::

:::practice-question{name="Keyboard Variables"}
Which of the following variables stores a numeric value that represents keys on the keyboard?

- [ ] `keyPressed()`
- [ ] `keyEvent()`
- [ ] `key`
- [x] `keyCode`
:::

:::practice-question{name="Keyboard Methods"}
What is the name of the method used to recognize keyboard events in Java Processing?

- [ ] `key`
- [x] `keyPressed()`
- [ ] `keyEvent()`
- [ ] `keyCode`
:::